---
title: "HPC hybrid-MHD simulations: Stellar Detonations and Convective Wave-Particle Transport in Tokamaks"
collection: talks
type: "Invited talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-06-16-alcs
venue: "The Australasian Leadership Computing Symposium 2023"
date: 2023-06-16
location: "Australian National University"
---
We present high-resolution MHD simulations of two fusion plasmas: the merger of two white dwarf stars using the moving-mesh AREPO code, and the demonstration of convective transport during frequency chirping of an Alfvén wave using the hybrid MEGA code.

When stars merge, they can do so violently, allowing for rapid exchanges of mass and complex density, temperature and internal energy distributions. These disruptions can lead to nuclear reactions and, possibly, thermonuclear runaways that would result in supernovae. Such binary interactions can also lead to the formation of an accretion disk as one star is ‘shredded’ and its mass is added to its companion. Our simulations of stellar mergers utilise the MHD + Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamic code AREPO, and show detonations that are consistent with the edge-lit scenario, creating an asymmetric ejecta pattern compatible with an off-centre explosion.

The physics of energetic particles plays an essential role in fusion plasmas, and involves the possibility of unacceptably large fast particle losses. A famous example is the destabilization of weakly damped plasma waves inside the gaps of the shear Alfven continuum, which entails redistribution or ejection of EPs either through diffusive transport or a convective transport. We have developed a procedure to examine energetic particle phase-space during long range frequency chirping phenomena in tokamak plasmas, and applied it to MEGA simulations of an Alfven eigenmode. These reveal the formation of coherent phase space structures which cause convective transport in phase space and imply a radial drift of the resonant particles.
